
Privacy in the Age Of Information (and algorithms)

Bipin C. Desai BipinC.Desai@concordia.ca 0000-0002-9142-7928
IDEAS/Concordia University Montreal, Canada
       




This paper raises the privacy issues related to information that is
accessible about individuals from their mobile devices and that which
is collected when they interact with and use so called "free" services
provided on the web.  The importance of privacy has been ignored by
most legislation and any laws passed have no teeth. The only exception
is the privacy protection that is embedded in the EU's General Data
Protection Regulation(GDPR). GDPR gives control to individuals over
their personal data and requires any organization which collects and
controls personal information to have in place appropriate measures
both technical and logistic, to implement the data protection
principles. In this paper, we propose a technical solution to provide
a personal email and web server with complete control of all
correspondence and contents. This would liberate users from fake free
services and provide privacy and security.


Keywords: Privacy, security, online social networks, free email
service, warrantless constant surveillance, Heimdaller


Privacy its rise and fall

According to some, privacy was the result of the growth of the middle
class who could afford better housing and their abode, even though
humble, became their castle. Liberalization of laws such as the one
that took the state out of the bedrooms recognized the right of people
to be left alone. However, this was only at the governmental level
since it had supreme power but the corporations were left to regulate
themselves. At the end of the first gilded age, the need was felt to
regulate the robber barons and their corporation..This was done by the
emergence of the workers unions and the need to share the riches with
the worker. The later was implemented with a progressive tax system
that supported the common good by taxing the haves to transfer to the
have-nots.  This afforded the luxury of privacy to the not so rich! It
must be noted that recently, the Supreme Court of the largest
functioning democracy in the history of humankind has ruled that
privacy is a human right: this in spite of an inane pronouncement of a
kid who became fabulously rich and influential.

The tools and technology that are the roots of the privacy
exploitation required many developments quite a number of these
occurred in the mid 20th century. The first of these was the
introduction of computers and the development of semiconductors, its
miniaturization and increase in computing power.  The interconnection
of computers and hence people was made possible with the introduction
of the Internet. In the early days, access to the internet was limited
to the academic communities, some businesses and government
agencies. The introduction of the web and the development of the
graphical browsers opened up the internet to an increasing number of
users.

The offer of web based free email service by start ups fueled by
venture capitalist allowed these companies the continuous access to
all email communications of an increasing number of users world wide!
The undeclared charge for this free service was and continues to be
the contents of their messages and these users who in turn attracted
more users and more contents. There being no laws to protect the
privacy of the contents of these messages, which are in plain
text. This clear text being the raw material for tailoring targeted
publicity to the users of this free email service was the raw material
used initially for monetizing the ‘free’ service.

The graphical web browser also opened up a new method of communicating
with family and friends. However, since the majority of users were
seduced by the allure of setting up a fee web presence without the
need to be tech-savvy, this was the start of what we now call online
social networks(OSN). The OSN attracted not only friends and family
but complete strangers. This attraction of becoming a celebrity has
been the force that pushed up the number of such users to billions. To
this date, instead of recognizing themselves as publishers, these OSN
claim to be simple platforms and take no responsibility for the
content they provide which has created many problems, including
bullying, extreme self-harm, fake news, genocide and terrorist act
co-ordination.

The web opened up the internet to the non-tech savvy user. Instead of
creating tools to make the Internet service such as email to be used
privately, securely and easily accessible to the non-tech savvy or
offering it via the national postal service, the unimaginative
politicians let it be provided by venture capitalists.

A system such as the web robot and allowing any robot to be served
freely by the web servers was one of the biggest blunders made by the
web community. The taking over of the web by the commercial players
and facilitating tracking in the web browser are other blunders driven
by monetizing the web. It is reported that there is an attempt to undo
the harm in the new web but again, some of the players are the same as
in the first web, and the same commercial pressure would jeopardize
this solution.

The cell phone which started out as a bulky device profited from the
miniaturization of semiconductor circuits and started getting smaller,
lighter and more popular. The addition of a screen and more computing
power and better and better networks transformed the cell phone from
an emergency device to a personal communication device. The tech giant
companies made sure that the new ‘smart’ cell phones have access to
their services and the cell phone replaced the personal computer and
the land line. The cell phone system also allowed bypassing the need
of setting up an extensive telecommunication infrastructure and the
need for laying and maintaining cabling and relay stations. This was
replaced by cell phone towers and relay stations. The mobile system
speeded up communication in emerging economies as well as the
developed ones.

With the growth of the internet and the mobile communication
infrastructure, the opportunity of gathering data on individuals from
their communications and interactions became relatively easy. The set
up of the Global Position System in the early seventies by the USAian
government along with the worldwide free access to the Standard
Positioning Service (SPS) provided precise location
information. System to use of the GPS location is built into the
current generation of mobile hand sets. The many applications
available for the mobile phone made it possible to introduce services
many of which require SPS.  The use of the global positioning system
allowed the various applications running on cell phones to keep
abreast of the location of the user. Some of these, useful to the user
for applications such as directions and maps, allowed the marketing of
nearby businesses to the cell phone user.

Furthermore, the applications on the mobile system allowed their
developer to precisely know the whereabouts of the mobile device and
hence its owner. These locations are recorded by the application
developer and the supplier of the mobile operating system. Along with
the web and the cell technology, the access to users data in their
communications and by tracking their use of the web and applying the
advances in computer science including data management and algorithms
for machine learning etc.  created what Zuboff calls Surveillance
Capitalism. The exploitation of personal data by private corporations
is finally drawing the attention of scholars, and columnists and it is
finally reaching the masses. The addiction to the cell phone means
that one is constantly looking at it even when out in company with
friends and family for a meal or just walking around.

The recognization of corporations as a legal entity made it possible
to put in power politicians which reversed the progressive nature of
the taxation in the wrong belief that there would be a trickled down
effect from the haves to the have-nots. Unfortunately, this effect has
not occurred and the growth of the middle class has been halted and
reversed. Competition by having another company provide similar,
privacy oriented service, seems hardly possible. Because of the large
share of the market another similar OSN, even one such as Google+ did
not succeed.

Exposure to Privacy in the Computer Science Curriculum


Many of the current tech giants are headed by people who may have
followeda computer science program and/or "tech-geeks" some of them
being drop outs. One can safely assume that the majority of the coders
could have had a computer science related education. However their
exposure to humanities and social sciences would have been very
limited if null as it is in many CS programs. The curriculum
recommendation from ACM/IEEE includes the following: "A computer
engineering curriculum must include preparation for professional
practice as an integral component. These practices encompass a wide
range of activities including management, ethics and values, written
and oral communication, working as part of a team, and remaining
current in a rapidly changing discipline." However not much is said
about issues of privacy and security except if it is not
ethical. However, with the recklessness shown by the robber barons of
the late 20th - early 21st century who go ahead like bulls in a china
shop and seem to have no regards for a person’s privacy.

The sample curriculum for Computer science which runs into hundreds of
pages includes exposure of the student to Social Issues and
Professional Practice and the documents point out that "Graduates
should recognize the social, legal, ethical, and cultural issues
inherent in the discipline of computing. They must further recognize
that social, legal, and ethical standards vary internationally. They
should be knowledgeable about the interplay of ethical issues,
technical problems, and aesthetic values that play an important part
in the development of computing systems. Practitioners must understand
their individual and collective responsibility and the possible
consequences of failure. They must understand their own limitations as
well as the limitations of their tools." In the section SP/Privacy and
Civil Liberties which is 2 Core-Tier1 hours where philosophical,
legal, privacy tools and implication and related issues are
presented. This hardly seems adequate and is likely to run off the
proverbial duck’s back. Since some of the aspects of this
responsibility is not encouraged to be practiced in the rest of the
program the final impact is almost nil. What is puzzling is that in
Appendix C of this document where course exemplars are given, there is
not a single one just for SP/Privacy and Civil Liberties. One, given
on page 304 on Social Issues and Professional Practice, is part of a
course which includes Human Computer Interaction and Graphics and
Visualization. Another example is Ethics the Information Age, (p436)
which however does not touch on the philosophical issue of property,
person-hood and the right of a person to privacy. In Stanford
university's CS program the course CS181 – Computers, Ethics, and
Public Policy allocates a scant 1.6 hours to Privacy Civil Liberties
(p501).

The privacy and security framework of the Canadian Institute for
Health Information (CIHI), an independent, not-for-profit organization
provides essential information on Canada’s health systems and the
health of Canadians. Most engineers and software designers are not
very well exposed to privacy and may have been exposed minimally to
security.  However they and the marketing people would likely ignore
most of the issues in such frameworks.

The privacy and security page of the USAian Federal Trade
Commission(FTC) has the following about data security: "Many companies
keep sensitive personal information about customers or employees in
their files or on their network. Having a sound security plan in place
to collect only what you need, keep it safe, and dispose of it
securely can help you meet your legal obligations to protect that
sensitive data. The FTC has free resources for businesses of any
size". The guidelines are only for self regulation and the penalty is
fairly small; as reported recently, about 22 million USD. The issue
addressed by FTC is based on the agreement it had with Facebook for
privacy but the FTC claims that the company "deceived consumers by
telling them they could keep their information on Facebook private,
and then repeatedly allowed it to be shared and made public". Compare
this paltry sum with the one in the guidelines for the EU which call
for maximum penalties or 20 million Euro or up to 4% of the world wide
revenue for a single breach which can add up to billions of Euros. In
the USAian system the privacy issues are being handled by a trade
commission, not a human rights agency.

Even though there is so much concern about security, there have been
some large breaches in the recent years. Many systems store sensitive
information such as passwords in clear text. The fact that the tech
giants share information with third parties is enough for one to opt
out of any system that needs third parties to carry on their central
tasks.

Source of Privacy Violations


The biggest sources of privacy violation are invisible. On-line
shopping requires passing valuable personal information to big as well
as small retailers. Some of them are fly-by-night ones while others
are multi-billion dollar enterprises. Many small fries are on the
coattails of specialized shopping portals. Many of these retailers to
increase their revenues, turn around and sell the personal information
to data aggregators. The portals also could have access to such data
and can use it to direct publicity for products and service to the
users and with use of cookies and trackers all this data goes into
many different data repositoriesto be exploited, ad infinitum.

While shopping or doing any operation on line" one is tracked by a
myriad of trackers. A case in point is a session with one's own
bank. If one has a tracker reporting add-on in the browser, e.g.,
Privacy Badger, one see the trackers used by these banks to track
their own costumers and share the data with these third parties! A
question sent to the bank of why this is being done is never responded
to!

A Typical privacy agreement


When a person signs up as a user of most of the ‘free’ on-line
services or to services such as mobile phone supplier, she accepts,
unread much less with a clear understanding of what it implies, their
privacy policy which is linked to equally unread and not understood
data policy. These policies may be updated without the users’
consent. As an example if one considers the privacy policy and the
data policy of Facebook, which runs to, in the version currently
accessible, 7 and 9 pages respectively; it is no wonder no one reads
these and assumes that these privacy policies mean that the site will
keep her personal information private and would not share it without
her permission. Little does the unsuspecting person knows that she is
giving away a free license to persons and organizers who believe that
privacy is no longer a social norm.

The user is required to let the supplier of the service reserve the
right to process, sell, trade or rent aggregated or the users
information which is anonymized. As it is well known by now that most
anonymizing scheme can be thwarted by combining information from
multiple sources.  The information that is up for grab includes(The
following is based on the privacy/data agreement of a number of
organization including - Apple, Blackberry, Google, Facebook, etc.)

Personal information: including name, mailing(postal) address, email
address, telephone number, IDs of accounts, device identifiers, PIN,
service provider information, account including credit card
credentials, passwords, records of all communication as well as
details of contacts.

Applications: All providers of applications have access to not only
their own application data but also may share this data with other
applications on the device. This looks like a modus operandi of all
application developers and as Zuboff says, anything that is not
guarded would be claimed by these new pirates.

Back-up data on cloud: Would have access to users’ personal
information including contacts, email addresses, calendar, memo,
tasks, display pictures, status messages, photos, audio, videos – the
stated reason is to be able to restore this information.

Cookies: These were introduced in the web space to overcome the
stateless nature of the web protocol. The reason for stateless nature
of web was due to the philosophy of free sharing of knowledge.
However, cookies and their derivatives have morphed into a nefarious
form to facilitate surveillance.

Financial Information: Any transaction through the system may require
credit status checking etc. any or all of which could be recorded and
shared with other parties.

Third party information: The service provider may combine your
information with ones obtained from other sources.

Retention Personal information:, Even after the expiry of any direct
association with the service provided it could be retained perhaps in
an anonimized form and may be used perpetually.

International operations and onward transfers: The service provider,
would require you to consent that your personal information may be
collected, used, processed, transferred or stored in multiple
jurisdictions.

Communication: The service provider may communicate information,
surveys, marketing materials, advertisements or personalized
content. The service provider may share your personal information
within the service provider and with their service providers,
financial, insurance, legal, accounting or other advisors.

Here are some of the things these systems have your permission to lay
claim on! Any information and content you provide or they collect from
creating or sharing content, contents of messages or communications
with others. and all information provided while using any of their
products including information of the account. They collect details
about your connections, address books. logs, meta-data and contents of
all communications including all SMSs and emails; pattern of usage
including what, when, where, who (and use their algorithms to try to
figure out why!). All transactions made which includes purchases which
would include the details of the credit/debit cards used,
authentication information, addresses and contact information about
the transaction. In addition they have access to actions taken by your
contact and the information they provide. Your location information is
used to determine where you live, where you go, what events you attend
and where you are at any point in time.  All this information is used
to create targeted publicity which is tailored to influence you, using
your foibles determined by their unknown algorithms.

The proliferation of the internet via the medium of the web to offer
all types of services requires a user to sign-up using a user name and
a password. Since more and more services, such as news,
financial. Governmental. social and commercial are now offered through
the web a typical user may have scores of user IDs and passwords. The
tech giants, to increase their presence, have offered to entered into
an agreement with many of these services to let the users employ these
tech giants credentials to log into these services. Thus the tech
giants can trace the user not only on their own platform but can have
access to what other services are being used and whatever other
information the target service may provide the tech giant. What and
how the information these giants would glean besides associating yet
another data point in the profiles for these users is not advertised
or communicated to the user.

Privacy violation at any level of sharing


One of the culprits in the current loss of privacy is the USAian
system, its constitution and the outlook of its capitalistic
system. Whereas there are some forms of restraint for the USAian
governments collecting and using personal information in its
constitution and amendments, the private sector is left alone to do as
it pleases with a laissez faire self policing attitude. What the
citizens do not trust the government to spy on is allowed to the
private corporations. That self regulation does not work is amply
illustrated in the recent Boeing 737 Max’s design flaws which led to
two deadly crashes.  An optional display that showed the disagreement
of the angle of attact sensors on the Boeing Max required additional
cost to the millions for the plane.

Furthermore, the fact that Boeing was able to get away with not having
the Federal Aviation Agency(FAA) really act as an independent quality
control shows that self regulation is unrelaible. According to, . "The
problems were apparently compounded by FAA rules allowing
manufacturers to essentially self-certify aircraft. Boeing reportedly
tried to speed up the process in order to catch its rival Airbus
A320neo, and pushed the FAA to give it more responsibility. There
wasn't a complete and proper review of the documents," a former Boeing
engineer said. "[The] review was rushed to reach certain certification
dates.". The failure of the correct software and the required
equipment for a high priced air-frame leads one to conjecture the type
of security employed by many of these tech giants who have no
regulation, no oversight and no competition and pay little taxes. They
fail to reveal the breach of security or the lack of it for months and
years. According to the press, Google did not reveal a security breach
for fear of regulations.  With current internet and wireless
technology, people actually pay to use the free services in the form
of internet connection monthly charges, buy and pay the connection
fees for ‘smart’ devices that allow them to be tracked. Unlike
criminals who are tracked by a tracking device imposed on them most
consumers now carry a tracking device and pay for it handsomely, every
month including for the bandwidth used for tracking.

The result of the USAian system, where the tech giants are based, is
that the private sector has laid claim on personal and private
information of the users of the myriad of devices that they own. Most
of the smart devices are controlled by just two operating platforms
again controlled by USAian tech giants. In addition, they control the
application stores that users can download the ‘apps’ from and earn a
percent of the fees for these applications. One wonders if this is not
an example of a monopoly!  Example of such laying a stake, like the
one used in the gold rush of yore, is to claim all human experience as
free raw material without any concern for individual rights and
without any payment of any source. As Zuboff compares these to the
edict recited by the Spanish conquistadors and later the settlers of
the west in what is now known as the U. S. A. This edict gave the
conquistadors and the settlers some form of divine rights which
allowed them to usurp the lands of the existing people and displaced
them or wiped them out.

Google made six cooked up declarations which confer on themselves the
right to translate the recorded experience of its users into
behavioral data and own it, abuse, use and share it as they see fit
and preserve these for perpetuity. They had no problem getting all
this data since they had captured the search, the email, the the cell
phone markets. They also were in control of the application market
place for their cellphones. Another instance of conquest by
declaration is the self proclaimed one by the Facebook founder which
stated that privacy as no longer a social norm. This statement from a
person with very little background in privacy was convenient since it
was the basis of Facebook's business model and this declaration, along
with a changeable data/privacy policy has been used to mine the
information entrusted to them by unsuspecting users. Facebook’s usage
of this data has been seen to violate the users privacy in many
ways. This includes influencing them not only to buy products and
services of questionable need but also to expose them to fake and
biased news and help create targeted persuasive ads to influence a
vote for doubtful candidates and proposals. It is no wonder, over the
years Facebook has faced increasing scrutiny borne out by the number
of times it has been cited by the privacy commissions, the courts and
the popular press. Facebook allowed phone company and other tech
giants access to access user data.: they stretch and overstep privacy
and competition laws and should be regulated urgently. Others have and
want to take Facebook to court.

According to the summary of the final report of UK’s Digital, Culture,
Media and Sport Committee: "among the countless innocuous postings of
celebrations and holiday snaps, some malicious forces use Facebook to
threaten and harass others, to publish revenge porn, to disseminate
hate speech and propaganda of all kinds, and to influence elections
and democratic processes—much of which Facebook, and other social
media companies, are either unable or unwilling to prevent.  …..The
big tech companies must not be allowed to expand exponentially,
without constraint or proper regulatory oversight. But only
governments and the law are powerful enough to contain them. The
legislative tools already exist. They must now be applied to digital
activity, using tools such as privacy laws, data protection
legislation, antitrust and competition law. If companies become
monopolies they can be broken up, in whatever sector. Facebook’s
handling of personal data, and its use for political campaigns, are
prime and legitimate areas for inspection by regulators, and it should
not be able to evade all editorial responsibility for the content
shared by its users across its platforms."  Even the people who were
involved in the early days of Facebook and its mentor seem to agree
with the findings of this and other reports., After having collected
millions of email addresses, Facebook says they would stop this
practice and notify users.

Facebook has used parental influence to mold UE laws and put pressure
on politicians, around the world, by promising local investment such
as installing data centers in exchange for lobbying for the company to
block privacy laws and any forthcoming laws should be Facebook
friendly,. The fact that the earnings the companies make by their
presence in a country is not being taxed is something that the tech
giants have been successful in protecting and they continue to lobby
for it. Facebook allows governments to target individuals and groups
to the extremes, e.g., Rohinga genocide, The new virage of Facebook to
privacy seems to be fake and meant to decrease their civil liabilities
and in fact yet another business spin to try to protect their dominant
position and keep at bay the regulations and corporate breakup .  Some
demands for investigating the lobbying of tech giants are ignored by
those in power who hope to benefit from their largess at the election
time.


Examples of privacy violations


Over the years, there have been many instances of violation of the
common notion of privacy. Even the blanket surrender of privacy in the
privacy agreements of the tech, giants is often not honoured, much
less the notion of privacy formed over the last few centuries. An
overall view is recently reported in that Google’s street view
violates privacy by taking videos of private homes spaces along with
people therein and publishes without any authority. When met with
resistance, held off and returned when no one was looking.

Facebook Beacon published purchases made by users without their
express consent. Facebook uploaded email contacts of 1.5m users
without consent and when discovered says it was inadvertent. Actually
it used a feature of a previous version. As usual the information
mined from the user contacts and propagated into other databases may
not be deleted but used. More of deny, deflect etc.

Google says a microphone in one of their products, which was not
revelaed to the buyers, was never activated; one has to take this with
a grain of salt when the courts have to tell them to take down
world-wide, search results of selling on the web products manufactured
in violation of trade secrets There have been many instances of tech
companies being warned about privacy. One such is the report by Denham
the Assistant Privacy Commissioner of Canada. At that early date the
report concludes “that Facebook did not have "safeguards in place to
prevent unauthorized access by application developers to users’
personal information, and furthermore was not doing enough to ensure
that meaningful consent was obtained from individuals for the
disclosure of their personal information to application developers".

There is the class action suit against Facebook that is going on for
years in British Columbia and the company has used all its resources
to keep this from being resolved. The case concerns the practice used
by Facebook as of 2011 to feature, users’ ‘likes’ in publicity without
the explicit users’ consent. The class action was filed in May
2014. The company denied it saying that the consent was automatic and
fought it all the way to the Supreme Court of Canada and after many
years, the case was won by the plaintiff and the class action was
returned to the BC courts after close to four years. It may take a few
more years before the class action suit is decided and of course there
would be appeals and likely trips back to the supreme court. In the
meantime most people would give up and this is what companies with
deep pockets able to hire the best lawyers count on.  For not
obtaining explicit consent from users to use their data, Facebook is
facing a fine of up to 5 billion USD from the USAians Federal Trade
Commission.

Companies claim that they protect your data; however, it seems that in
fact they exploit it and being hacked as reported in the popular press
time and again.  The number of breaches of data from companies is
affecting more and more people since the early days when Apple stored
passwords in the clear and had to grudgingly own up to it


Childrens’ Privacy


Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act (COPPA) this two decades old
USAian federal act protects childrens privacy by giving parents tools
to control what information is collected from their children online.
The personal information consists of: a first and last name; a home or
other physical address including street name and name of a city or
town; an e-mail address; telephone number; a Social Security number;
any other identifier that could determine the physical or online
contacting of a specific individual; or information concerning the
child or the parents of that child that the website collects online
from the child and combines with other identifiers . A number of tech
giants have been fined under the COPPA violation. TikTok is a OSN for
video-sharing application and it is alleged to not seek parental
consent before collecting information from children under 13 years
old. The company is by the governments in India and Bangladesh and has
been fined in the USA.

Other on-line tech giants let children run up credit card charges
using in application charges while playing games on devices such as
iPad and iPhone. This kind of preying on children has been going on
for a long time as illustated in a story involving Farmville, a
Facebook game, reported in 2010.

Legal Actions


The Privacy Commissioner of Canada had launched an investigation in
2018 to examine if Facebook’s practices are in compliance with
Canada’s federal private sector privacy law, the Personal Information
Protection and Electronic Documents Act called PIPEDA)However, this
was not the first time: There were early warning in 2009 about the
privacy issues with OSN such as Facebook, .  Many of the complaints
found Facebook to be in contravention of the Act and Facebook was to
take corrective measures. However, as in the class action launched by
Deborah Douez, the case has been going on over many years and is yet
another example of the deny, deflect and defend mentality of these
tech giants,,. In a more recent report of joint investigation of
Facebook by the Privacy Commissioner of Canada and the Information and
Privacy Commissioner for British Columbia the conclusions drawn are
that Facebook failed to obtain valid and meaningful consent of users
nor their friends. Furthermore the company did not have adequate
safeguard to protect users information and was not accountable for the
information under its control.  The selective restriction used by
Google for example in Google v Equustek Inc, was found to be not
sufficient and the request for a world wide ban was upheld.


The availability of free widely used OSN platforms allows any one to
post anything on it. The posters range from ignorant and zealot
bigots, paid geeks, agents of governments to misinformed
twitters. After many denials and deflections some of these OSN are
finally admitting that their platform is a vehicle for fake news
etc. and making a feeble attempt to do something. Where the attempt is
lack-luster, a mere 40 people, to fight millions of potential sources
of fake news. The company is making sure to get as much spin out of it
as possible by inviting dozens of journalists into the ‘war’ room to
fight this fake news; there being a claim that these crews are backed
by other unnamed and unseen experts and of course the unknown,
unproven algorithms!

While these tech giants claim to be not evil and want people to
connect, they are in fact exploiting the recorded human experience to
enrich themselves. By using the leverage of different kinds of
equity(more than one vote for some types of shares, no vote for others
or/and and not allowing some of the voting shareholders to vote
against members of the board), they retain the majority voting rights
and make sure that the reins of these tech giants are preserved in a
dynastic fashion. The security system of their host country (USA)
allows this type of capitalism.  The USAians, who seem to not question
such practices to encourage growth without much social good, are
responsible for this dystopian statuses existance and continue to
degrade human existence not only in their country but in most other
countries. The exception are those countries who have put in
safeguards and nurtured their own tech giants.

Any challenge to what these tech giants have usurped and now own is to
take legal action which except for a few is beyond the economic means
and personal energy, commitment and moral resources of the rest of us.

Waiting for a Solution


The protection of privacy, a human right, under threat from tech
giants and goblins that they create requires some action. This could
be either in the form of political and legislative and the form would
be regulations and legislation with sizable penalties proportional to
the income of the culprit, taxing the income etc. Another approach to
be used is to set up national service for what now has become a way of
many communications. The third approach, presented in the next
section, is a technical solution to render the tech giants obsolete!

Some opinion expressed in the press for handling the tech giants is to
recognize the service they provide as public service and either
provide a national service under the control of an independent neutral
organization and/or socialize them. They have monopolized a number of
services that they have usurped or re-engineered and made the
population addicted to them. The addiction is evident in the homes,
offices, public places and social get togethers where everyone
constantly glances at their hand held devices. These addicts are
waiting for the next shot! No one seems to have recognized this
addiction.

Waiting for a political solution is like En attendant Godot but Godot
never comes. The bent politicians are not in a hurry nor seem to have
the moral strength to breakup these tech giants. The addiction that
has been created with the so called free services has kept the
politicians at bay. No thought has been given in any government to set
up a national email service as an essential public infrastructure much
as health, postal, road, school or train service. Even the tel-comm
service is regulated in most countries. Since the internet depends on
the tel-comm service it should be regulated with the tech giants at
least held responsible for the contents. They should be taxed on their
earnings in the jurisdiction where it is earned; there should be a
penalty for the jobs that are shipped outside the country and for
importing and exporting data.  The tax should be at a progressive rate
where the majority of the excess profit is taxed. This may encourage
the tech giants to set up jurisdictional data farms to serve local
emails, social contents.

Douthat compares the western internet dominated by the USAian tech
giants and the Chinese one dominated by the central government. The
result in the western is the addiction generated by the internet and
the control of it by a few corporations which at times work with the
government and mistakes made on it are magnified. Lies and fake news
are spread by it and real news is, by repetition from the top, labeled
as fake news.

Cryptocurrency has evolved much later than search engines. Its spread
is liable to upset the financial sector and the basis for the support
of the political system everywhere much as the so called open internet
has done by concentrating the imperialistic nature in the hands of a
few tech giants all under the USAian form of capitalistic
protection. However, the move to regulate Cryptocurrency has already
begun in the form of legislators in various parts of the
world. Regulation of the tech giant to respect the privacy of its
users and not exploit their personal information to manipulate them is
missing.

A possible start



One of the principals of privacy in the European Union’s General Data
Protection Regulation(GDPR) is that a person is the owner of her data
and she has the right to decide who can use it and how. Regardless of
where and how the data is shared, it can be amended, deleted or she
could determine who and how it would be accessed. GDPR went into
effect in the EU in May 2018.  Its objective is to give control to
individuals over their personal data and requires any organization who
collects and controls personal information to have in place
appropriate measures, both technical and logistic, to implement the
data protection principles.

Such organizations are required to disclose their legal basis and
purpose of data collection operations and have publicized the period
of data retention and and the sharing of it with third parities. The
data collecting organization are required to provide, to any data
subject on request, a portable copy of the data collected in a common
format. The data subject has the right to have their data corrected or
even deleted. There are penalties for violation of this regulation,
Under the violation of this regulation, recently France has fined
Google 5.7 Million USD.

In the few months of coming into force of GDPRGDPR, the USAian
government is finally waking up to some form of legislation for
consumer privacy, driven ironically, not due to concern for consumer
privacy but as a another component of high tech competition as
outlined by Apples CEO,. In the meantime activists are filing an
increasing number of complaints under the GDPR.  In spite of the
protection afforded by GDPR, it still allows the fundamental rights of
the data subject not to override the business' legitimate interest of
the data processor!

GDPR applies only to the EU, but given the scale of the market, many
companies are deciding it’s easier – not to mention a public relations
win – to apply its terms globally. The problem is that even if there
is a directive, even from a court, tech giants seem to consider
themselves immune to these. A very recent example of this concerns a
ban put in by a New Zealand court to name an accused killer.  The
local media companies, against who the court could take action, use
resources to make sure such court bans are respected not only by
themselves but also by their own social media channels. Google which
does not apply bans globally and in line with this policy of
geo-blocking (which is basically not being bound by local blackouts
globally but only in the jurisdiction concerned) had emailed it out to
users, apparently not in New Zealand, who had signed up for "what’s
trending in New Zealand".

The effect of GDPR is being felt on this side of the Atlantic and
accessing, for example a proper notice about cookies and use of
analytics has to be given to EU citizens when they access USAian web
sites: as usual there is a agree or not agree option! As usual it is
too tempting to agree instead of looking at the privacy policy, third
party partners or terms of service which are many pages long as
pointed out earlier.

Competition by having another tech start-up to provide similar service
seems hardly possible. Because of the large share of the market
another similar OSN, even one such as Google+ did not succeed. Other
avenues being used in the EU is to allow competition by blocking the
tech giants from buying start-ups who may become a serious challenger
some day. Such acquisitions have been allowed to proceed in the USA to
date: buying of WhatAp and Instagram by Facebook are examples. The
European model where the dominant giants are forced to share the data
goes back to the conclusion of the Workshop A held in April 1995 which
recommended search engines share information.

Way out of the privacy and security trap


The curernt situation where a small number of Usaian tech giants are
controlling the web, all human knowledge and experience; they are
manipulating awareness and beliefs to serve their aim of continued
domination and maximizing profits. Their huge profits allow them to
buy out any potential competition and are moving in new directions
every day. This, after all has important elements in common with
imperialism and totalitarianism. No surprise then that a country which
experienced the latter most dramatically, Germany, has some of the
strongest laws to safeguard privacy. Even still these efforts are
merely corrective and merely polices the problem; not solve it. To
actually overcome this system, a new solution is needed.

It is unlikely that many politicians who are heading governments or
are part of the government have much motivation to do anything about
privacy. The existing laws have no teeth and the tech giants are happy
to put up the three big Ds(deny, deflect, delay). Each year they can
delay the action, they are more established, made a few more billions
and were able to finance more elections and place their men(mostly) in
the drivers seat.

There are many political ideas put forward by various aspiring
politicians in the western world. This is so in the prelude to the
USAian 2020 presidential election. They include breaking up the tech
giants, giving more control to the users of their data, making the
algorithms transparent etc. None of this may work; take for instance
making the algorithms more transparent; most users who don’t even read
the privacy agreement would not be able to understand the working of
the algorithms. It is also doubtful that the tech giants would ever be
willing to make their algorithms transparent.

The other idea is to increase competition; however this is also a no
starter. The tech giants have big market capitalization and have
politicians in their pockets. They make all possible effort to
influence politicians since they have direct lines to the ministers
and presidents.  As a result we are proposing here a method to turn
the clock back and bring home all communications and the data that is
shared.

Lifting the cloud

Most users of the ‘free’ services would not have read the privacy or
the data-use policy when they sign up for these services. Reading
these policies which are many pages long would be confusing with all
their exceptions, and fighting any of its effect leads to years of
battle in courts as is evidenced by the case cited earlier; such drawn
out cases would exhaust the emotional energy of most users.

Web is a relatively recent way of doing things and as in many facets
of human existence the way to do things swings from one way to another
like a pendulum. Computing is no exception. We started with the idea
of a ‘one of computing system’ which would have been used to produce
useful mathematical tables which would be printed and shared. In
reality, this is not what happened. Computers were developed as a
proof of concept and from there went to become what was called “main
frames’ - expensive and bulky systems. They were time shared by many
users locally or remotely using dedicated telecommunication lines.

In the nineteen-sixties there were two trains of developments. A
family of main frames were affordable enough to be used by many
organizations to have their own computer systems and software
development teams. At the same time mini-computers were developed to
be used by smaller organizations and labs. The mini-computers evolved
into the mini-computers and personal computer (PC) in the late 1970s
and many people were able to have a personal desktop to do their own
processing. The personal data was housed in the hard disk of the
PC. Development of the hard disk technology allowed increase in speed
and capacity.  It was possible to store all local information locally.

The development and the spread of internet in the 1980s and then the
world wide web starting in the early 1990s along with the graphical
browser allowed the non-tech savvy person to be connected. The
misdirection of the web by mainly commercial interests and the
opportunity to claim uncharted territories prompted many tech
buccaneers and geeks of the "dot.com" craze to start violating
unwritten traditions and using and introducing surveillance tools, and
thereby were able to amass huge troves of information.

The lack of the postal services to see electronic mail as a new public
postal service, the ignorance and self-interest of politicians allowed
the lack of regulation in the new domain allowing ownership of
personal information of hundreds of million of individuals. The first
incursion of private venture capitalists were in the domain of web
search and email and the early companies included Altavista,
Yahoo. Excite. Lycos. Even though web search engines started appearing
in 1993, it was a later entry which captured the search market. Even
though most search engines produce similar results, the habits and
default setting in browsers tend to prioritize one.

As pointed out in the concentration of data by such organizations is
making it difficult for competition to be effective. The EU has ruled
against Google many times in recent years; all of these are fought in
the courts and the monopoly continues. The habits of people to flock
to a system where others are and hence believe to be a better system
has worked against titans as Google was forced to shutdown Google+
their social network.  Not waiting for the breakup these tech giants
and believing that less is better we propose here for users to take
back control of their data, lives and privacy by offering them to host
their own email and web server and setting up their own social
network.

In a previous work we have pointed out the privacy issues with the
increasing number of IoTs which transmit personal information to the
servers of the makers of the IoTs. The key there was Heimdaller and
the setting up of a Software Assurance Agency(SAA). This agency, is an
independent one and requires that any device manufacturer must submit
all software and updates to it for verification. It is independent and
hence not run by a tech giant.  No software unless it is certified for
suitability would be certified. Unlike the ‘stores’ run by tech
giants, SAA does not get a percent of the revenue for the software;
however it charges a fee based on the size of the corporation. It is
felt that there is a need for an independent organization such as SAA
for the software industry much like the certification authorities CSA
and UL. Here we propose to extend Heimdaller to not only monitor the
IoTs but also act as a server for a personal email system and the web.

There are many systems that allow users to create their own web pages:
an example is Facebook! Considering the number of articles, and
litigations it has generated it is time that instead of giving away
all this information to a corporation and sharing it with strangers, a
personal web server could be used to allow the personal web page
accessible only to the immediate family and friends.

The fact that a micro processor such as Raspberry is very affordable
and is suitable for driving a personal email and web server with very
little load and bandwidth need; that solid state memory and drives are
now very affordable and could provide sufficient secure storage for
the family server. The system would have its own storage and backup
system; hence all storage of the family data, emails, web pages,
comments etc. would be stored locally and there would be no need to
use a cloud and thus deprive tech giants of the free raw
material(data) and an opportunity to mine this information for their
own profit. The proposed system, hence, include processing and
storage. With a cheap processor such as Raspberry 2 and SSD the modem
functionality required in private homes to connect to the internet
through the intermediary of an ISP takes on the function not only of a
sentry but also of a data vault.

As Arendt in her chapter on Imperialism, talking about Cecil Rhodes,
quoting the words of Millen "expansion is everything". Rhodes, looking
at the stars and planet fell into despair since he wanted to annex all
the planets for the British empire that he adored. Much like Rhodes
some of the tech giants consider growth to be the good thing
regardless of the collateral harm it does. For instance Facebook knew
that its platform could expose someone to bullying and coordinates
terrorist attacks, This blunt memo by Bosworth recognizes that and
noted that "The best products don’t win. The ones everyone use
win.". With products like his, more users are attracted and they
invite yet more!



                                                                         
* Proposal for a Technical Solution A technical proposal to address
      the tech giants privacy violation.
   


Proposal for a Technical Solution



Breaking up the tech giants is not going to happen soon nor would an
alternate commercial service start with the monetary power of the
existing tech giants. They have the resources and staying power to
bankrupt, buy and squash competition. They have hundreds of lawyers
working for them and connections to the highest level of the
governments. The proposed system includes a modest processor, an email
and web server and a light weight database and a new generation of
modem router. The system addresses the biggest source of privacy
violation: email and web presence.

Our proposal is simple; add the functionality of an email server and a
web server to the modem-wireless router that mostpeople now have in
theirhome of small office. This requires the adding of simple
interfaces to allow even the most non-tech savvy user to mange these
servers. All emails will originate in the users’ owned system; the
personal web server would host the persons web pages and all the
contents would be stored locally. Access to the web server would be
limited and the data could be shared as appropriate with various level
of security. Only invited persons would be able to access any contents
and since the user is in control of the web server and all its
contents, she has the full control. Heimdaller is the gate keeper and
all interaction of the Internet and IoTs including those coming from
the users and the IoT maker goes through the gatekeeper.  All software
updates, have to be submitted to the SAA which verifies them and if
they pass the tests of functionalities, it is certified and accessible
to Heimdaller. Only SAA verified software could be installed in the
the system

There would no longer be the need of any tech giants to provide email
or web service. Technology has progressed to such an extent that these
services could be incorporated in a device many home owners already
have and its cost would be no more than that of a latest mobile
device. The system would provide, each family in their own home an
email server, a web server with their own family pages where they can
post their news and share it with family and friends. The web server
and the user interface would be such that expertise in making web
pages would not be required. It is expected that the basics of
internet usage, emailing, on-line chatting etc. would become programs
in school. By including encryption in both the email and web contents,
the leak of contents by eavesdropper is avoided.

The above development would mean that the not-really free services
offered by the tech mammoths would not be required. So instead of
waiting for a political solution from bent politicians, we are
proposing a technical solution which would be created and maintained
by the volunteer open source community and financed by required
contributions from corporations making devices or software and
donations by users.
 
Conclusion

The current practice of tech giants can only be neutralized by a
technical solution where, their service would not be required. Once
each family and businesses have their own static IP address and a
hardnedconnection to the interenet with a server that provides
emailand web service one becomes independent.The web server would not
allow any robots and the gatekeepr, Heidammlalr would not allow any
untrusted/uncertified software to be installed in the system. The
development of such a sytem is the next challenge of the academic
community!

Acknowledgement

The author is indebted to scores of commentators and op-ed writers who
have been able to see the privacy being attacked by the tech
giants. He also likea to acknowledge the many intresting discussion he
had with Drew Desai (Univ. of Ottawa) and his valuable suggestions for
the final format of this paper.













Appendix: The web from an early participant

 Soon after the so called official inauguration of the world wide
 web(WWW) in the form of the first WWW meeting in Geneva, a flurry of
 activities were held in U. S. A. This included a rushed announcement
 by the National Center for Super-computing Applications(NCSA) of
 ‘Mosaic and the Web’ conference, which was renamed WWW II, and was
 held in Chicago. Whereas the first was announced by Robert Cailliau
 the second was spearheaded by NCSA Mosaic. One of the early
 resolutions of these two meetings was raised in the Navigational and
 Priority workshops held during the first world wide web meeting
 (WWW-1) in Geneva in 1994. Other activity in the first days of the
 web was one in July 1995: it being a forum held by the USA National
 Science and Technology Council’s Committee on Information and
 Communication in Lister Hill Center (Bethesda, MD) entitled America
 in the Age Of information. A number of White Papers were presented;
 looking through the list one finds that none of the white papers had
 touched on the issue of privacy. There was, but one, presentation on
 security.

During the subsequent early WWW meetings, some of the people involved
in the navigation priority workshop devised various mechanisms for
search in the new web. This included the WebJouornal the support of
robots and soon thereafter the early search engines. During WWWIII, in
Darmstradt, the pioneers of the early search engines felt that to
provide for the financial needs of the search engines, the side panel
to display paid publicity would be appropriate. This way the paid
publicity would be separated from the search results. This was the
method used until a late arrived: initially, this new system was
idealistic but soon became, under pressure from the venture
capitalists, one of the leaders of the what has been termed the
digital gangsters. All these systems are based on collecting huge
amounts of personal information about the users, be it from free
emails, or postings made on one of the online social networks (OSN)

99




Aksoy, Ayberk, Desai, Bipin C., 2019. Heimdallr: A system design for
the next generation of IoTs In Proceedings of International Conference
on Industrial Control Network and System Engineering Research
(ICNSER2019) ACM, New York, NY, USA, 10 pages
https://doi.org/0.1145/3333581.3333590


ACM, CE2016: Computer Engineering Curricula 2016,
https://www.acm.org/binaries/content/assets/education/ce2016-final-report.pdf

ACM, CS2013: Curriculum Guidelines for Undergraduate Programs in
Computer Science,
https://www.acm.org/binaries/content/assets/education/
cs2013webfinal.pdf

ACM, Curricula Recommendation.
https://www.acm.org/education/curricula-recommendations


Arednt, Hannah, The Origin of Totalitarianism, Meridian Book, 1951, p
124

BBC, Amazon, Apple and Google face data complaints,
https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-46944694 last accessed May 6, 2019

BBC, Google hit with €4.3bn Android fine from EU, Jul. 18 2018
https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-44858238 last accessed May 6, 2019

AAI, America in the Age of Information, July 6-7, 1995, Lister Hill
Center, Bethesda MD, http://users.encs.concordia.ca/
bcdesai/Age-of-Information-July-1995.pdf

 Desai, Bipin C., Pinkerton, Brian, Workshop A: Web−wide
Indexing/Semantic Header or Cover Page, Summary, April 10, 1995,
http://users.encs.concordia.ca/
bcdesai/web-publ/www3-wrkA/www3-wrkA-proc.pdf, also available from
Spectrum Repository:
https://spectrum.library.concordia.ca/985374/1/WWW-III-WrkShpA.pdf
last accessed May 6, 2019

 Desai, Bipin C., Swiercz, Stan, WebJournal: Visualization of a Web
Journey, June 1995,
http://users.encs.concordia.ca/bcdesai/web-publ/WebJournal.pdf, Last
accessed, May 7, 2019

 Desai, Bipin C., IoT: Imminent ownership Threat.  In Proc. of 21st
International Database Application Enginnerring Symosium, Bristol, UK,
July 2017 (IDEAS 2017), 8 pages.
https://doi.org/10.475/3105831.3105843



BELL CANADA AND LYCOS ANNOUNCE JOINT VENTURE, Feb 2, 2000,
http://www.bce.ca/news-and-media/releases/show/bell-canada-and-lycos-announce-joint-venture

Bell, Emily Mark Zuckerberg’s Facebook mission statements hide his
real aim, The Guardian, Mar.10, 2019,
https://www.theguardian.com/media/commentisfree/2019/
mar/10/markzuckerberg-facebook-mission- statements-hides-his-real-aim

Beckett, Samuel En attendant Godott, Les Editions de Minuit, Paris,
1952

CBC Radio Facebook has become one of world's 'most dangerous
monopolies,
https://www.cbc.ca/radio/thecurrent/the-current-for-may-10-2019-1.5129874/friday-may-10-2019-full-transcript-1.5131529

Cadwalladr, Carole, My TED talk: how I took on the tech titans in
their lair, Guardain, Apr. 21, 2019,
https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2019/apr/21/carole-cadwalladr-ted-tech-google-facebook-zuckerberg-silicon-valle

Cadwalladr, Carole, Campbell, Duncan Revealed: Facebook’s global
lobbying against data privacy laws, The Guardain, Mar. 2. 2019,
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2019/mar/02/

Chisick, Chris Supreme Court of Canada Upholds BC Decision to Grant
Worldwide De-Indexing Order Against Google, June 28, 2017
https://www.casselsbrock.com/CBNewsletter/
SupremeCourtofCanadaUpholdsBCDecisiontoGrant
WorldwideDeIndexingOrderAgainstGoogle,
https://www.canlii.org/en/ca/scc/doc/2017/2017scc34/2017scc34.html

 CIHI, Privacy and Security Risk Management Framework ,
https://www.cihi.ca/en/about-cihi/privacy-and-security

Confessore, Nicholas, Rosenberg, Matthew, Damage Control at Facebook:
6 Takeaways From The Times’sInvestigation, New York Times, Nov. 14,
2018, https://www.nytimes.com/2018/11/14/technology/
facebook-crisis-mark-zuckerberg-sheryl-sandberg.htm

Cook, Tim, You Deserve Privacy Online. Here's How You Could Actually
Get It,
http://time.com/collection/davos-2019/5502591/tim-cook-data-privacy/

Duffy, Andrew Trudeau and Liberals win majority in historic return to
power Ottawa Citizen, Oct. 20, 2015
https://ottawacitizen.com/news/politics/justin-trudeau-and-liberals-stage-historic-return-to-power

CBC, B.C. court approves class-action lawsuit against Facebook, May
30, 2014
https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/british-columbia/facebook-class-action-lawsuit-launched-by-vancouver-woman-1.266046,
Last accessed, May 6, 2019

CBC, Facebook wins appeal to stop B.C. class-action lawsuit over
privacy, Jun 19, 2015,
https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/british-columbia/facebook-wins-appeal-to-stop-b-c-class-action-lawsuit-over-privacy-1.3120849,
Last accessed, May 6, 2019

CTV, Supreme Court clears way to B.C. class-action against Facebook,
June 23, 2017,
https://www.ctvnews.ca/canada/supreme-court-clears-way-to-b-c-class-action-against-facebook-1.3473026,
Last accessed, May 6, 2019

Denham, Elizabeth, Report of Findings into the Complaint Filed by the
Canadian Internet Policy and Public Interest Clinic (CIPPIC) against
Facebook Inc. Under the Personal Information Protection and Electronic
Documents Act, PIPEDA Report of Findings 2009-008, July 16, 2009,
https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/opc-actions-and-decisions/investigations/investigations-into-businesses/2009/pipeda-2009-008/
Last accessed, April 18, 2019

Dance, Gabriel J.X., et.al, As Facebook Raised a Privacy Wall, It
Carved an Opening for Tech Giants, NY Times, Dec. 18, 2018,
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/12/18/technology/facebook-privacy.html

Gates, Dominic Flawed analysis, failed oversight: How Boeing, FAA
certified the suspect 737 MAX flight control system Seattle Times,
Mar. 17, 2019
https://www.seattletimes.com/business/boeing-aerospace/failed-certification-
faa-missed-safety-issues-in-the-737-max-system-implicated-in-the-lion-air-crash/
Last accessed, May 19, 2019


D’Onfro, Jillian, Google did not disclose security bug because it
feared regulation, says report, CNBC, Oct 8 2018,
https://www.cnbc.com/2018/10/08/google-reportedly-exposed-private-data-of-at-least-hundreds-of-thousands-of-plus-users.html

Douthat Ross, The Only Answer Is Less Internet, New York Times, April
13, 2019.
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/13/opinion/china-internet-privacy.html,
Last accessed April 23, 2019

Dent, Steve Report: Boeing's crucial 737 Max safety analysis was
flawed EnGadget, Mar. 18, 2019
https://www.engadget.com/2019/03/18/boeing-737-max-faa-certification-flaws/
Last accessed April 23, 2019

The Economist, The future of big tech Why big tech should fear Europe,
The Economist, Mar 23rd 2019,
https://www.economist.com/leaders/2019/03/23/why-big-tech-should-fear-europe

Data Policy - Facebook, https://www.facebook.com/ about/privacy/update

Terms of Service – Facebook,
https://www.facebook.com/legal/terms/update

Fleshman, Glenn, FTC Considers Record Fine for Facebook Over Violation
of User Privacy Agreement It Made in 2012, Report Says,
http://fortune.com/2019/01/18/facebook-privacy-ftc-record-fine-considered/

Frenkel, Sheera, et. al.  Delay, Deny and Deflect: How Facebook’s
Leaders Fought Through Crisis NY Times, Nov. 14, 2018,
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/11/14/technology/facebook-data-russia-election-racism.html

COPPA, Children's Online Privacy Protection Act,
https://www.ftc.gov/enforcement/statutes/childrens-online-privacy-protection-act

 FTC, Privacy and Security,
 https://www.ftc.gov/tips-advice/business-center/privacy-and-security

 FTC, Careful Connections: Building Security in the Internet of
 Things,
 https://www.ftc.gov/tips-advice/business-center/guidance/careful-connections-building-security-internet-things

Goodwin, Bill , et al., Facebook asked George Osborne to influence EU
data protection law, Computer Weekly, Mar. 2, 2019,
https://www.computerweekly.com/news/252458229/Facebook-asked-George-Osborne-to-influence-EU-data-protection-law

GDPR, What is GDPR and how will it affect you?,
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2018/may/21/what-is-gdpr-and-how-will-it-affect-you

GDPR, General Data Protection Regulation https://gdpr-info.eu/

 Graham-Harrison, Emma, Inside Facebook's war room: the battle to
protect EU elections, Guardian, May 5, 2019,
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2019/may/05/facebook-admits-huge-scale-of-fake-news-and-election-interference

Guruswamy, Menaka India’s Supreme Court Expands Freedom NY Times,
Sept. 10, 2017
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/09/10/opinion/indias-supreme-court-expands-freedom.html?
    

Guliani, Neema Singh, W Should Be Able to Take Facebook to Court, NY
Times, Jan.. 6, 2019,
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/01/06/opinion/facebook-privacy-violation.html

 GPS, Global Positioning System History,
https://www.nasa.gov/directorates/heo/scan/
communications/policy/GPSHistory.html Last accessed Apr. 7, 2019

Facebook uploaded email contacts of 1.5m users without consent, The
Guardian, Apr. 18, 2019,
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2019/apr/18/facebook-uploaded-email-contacts-of-15m-users-without-consent

Hughes, Chris It’s Time to Break Up Facebook, NY Times. May 9, 2019,
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/05/09/opinion/sunday/chris-hughes-facebook-zuckerberg.html

Hart, David, On the Origins of Google:, August 17, 2004,
https://www.nsf.gov/discoveries/discsumm.jsp?cntnid=100660

Hem, Alex, Apple chief calls for laws to tackle 'shadow economy' of
data firms, Jan. 17, 2019,
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2019/jan/17/apple-chief-tim-cook-calls-for-laws-to-tackle-shadow-economy-of-data-firms

Huish, Robert, Balazo Patric, Unliked: How Facebook is playing a part
in the Rohingya genocide, The Conversation, Jan. 2, 2018,
https://theconversation.com/unliked-how-facebook-is-playing-a-part-in-the-rohingya-genocide-89523

Insley, Jill FarmVille user runs up £900 debt The Guardian, Apr. 7,
2010
https://www.theguardian.com/money/2010/apr/07/farmville-user-debt-facebook

Johnson, Bobby, Privacy no longer a social norm, says Facebook founder
, The Guardian, Jan 11, 2010,
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2010/jan/11/facebook-privacy

Jacobsson, Andreas; Davidsson, Paul, Towards a Model of Privacy and
Security for Smart Homes.  Proc.: 2015 IEEE 2nd World Forum on
Internet of Things (WF-loT), p. 727-732 URL:
https://doi.org/10.1109/WF-IoT.2015.7389144

Jenkins, Simon, Facebook is out of control and politicians have no
idea what to do The Guardian, Feb, 18, 2019,
https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2019/feb/18/
facebook-powerful-politicians-commons-abuse

 Lycos, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lycos

 Manhire, Toby, New Zealand courst banned naming Grace Millane’e
accused killer,. Google just emailed it out 13 Dec. 2018,
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2018/dec/13/new-zealand-courts-banned-naming-grace-millanes-accused-killer-google-just-emailed-it-out

Madrigal, Alexis C. , What We Know About Facebook’s Latest Data
Scandal, The Atlantic, June 4, 2018,
https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2018/06/what-we-know-about-facebooks-latest-data-scandal/561992/

Meyer, David, In the Wake of GDPR, Will the U.S. Embrace Data
Privacy?, Fortune, Nov. 29. 2018,
http://fortune.com/2018/11/29/federal-data-privacy-law/

Morozov, Evgeny, It's not enough to break up Big Tech. We need to
imagine a better alternative, Guardian, May 11, 2019
https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2019/may/11/big-tech-progressive-vision-silicon-valley

Mullin, Joe Privacy lawsuit over Gmail will move forward Aug. 16, 2016
https://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2016/08/privacy-lawsuit-over-gmail-will-move-forward/

King, Mark Parents told to beware children running up huge bills on
iPad and iPhone game apps Guardian, Jan. 12, 2013
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/jan/12/parents-children-in-app-purchases

McLaren Leah Is Elizabeth Denham the Only Person Powerful Enough to
Take on Facebook?  The Walrus, Apr. 18, 2019
https://thewalrus.ca/is-elizabeth-denham-the-only-person-powerful-enough-to-take-on-facebook/

Martin, Nicole Was The Facebook '10 Year Challenge' A Way To Mine Data
For Facial Recognition AI?, Forbes, Jan. 17, 2019.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/nicolemartin1/2019/01/17/was-the-facebook-10-year-challenge-a-way-to-
mine-data-for-facial-recognition-ai4b56c3fe5859

The history of Mobile phones, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Historyof
mobilephones, last accessed April, 2019

 McNamee, Roger I Mentored Mark Zuckerberg. I Loved Facebook. But I
Can't Stay Silent About What's Happening, The Time, Jan ., 17, 2019,
http://time.com/5505441/mark-zuckerberg-mentor-facebook-downfall/

 Millen, Sarah Gertrude, Rhodes, London, 1933, p. 138.

Nancherla, Aparna, Lee, Christopher, The Infinite Scroll, New York
Times, April 13, 2019,
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/13/opinion/sunday/the-infinite-scroll.html,

Privacy Commissioner launches Facebook investigation.  March 20, 2018,
https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/
opc-news/news-and-announcements/2018/nr-c180320/

 OSN, Why the UK is taking on social networks over child safety,
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2019/feb/06/why-uk-is-taking-on-social-networks-child-safety,
Last accessed April 16, 2019

Le NPD réclame à la commissaire au lobbying une enquête sur Facebook,
La Presse, Mar. 4, 2019,
https://www.lapresse.ca/actualites/politique/politique-canadienne/201903/04/01-5216953-le-npd-reclame-a-la-commissaire-au-lobbying-une-enquete-sur-facebook.php

Pegg, David, Facebook labelled 'digital gangsters' by report on fake
news, Guardian, Feb. 18, 2019,
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2019/feb/18/facebook-fake-news-investigation-report-regulation-privacy-law-dcms

Joint investigation of Facebook, Inc. by the Privacy Commissioner of
Canada and the Information and Privacy Commissioner for British
Columbia PIPEDA Report of Findings 2019-002, April 25, 2019
https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/opc-actions-and-decisions/investigations/investigations-into-businesses/2019/pipeda-2019-002/
Last accessed April 30, 2019

Paul, Kari, Facebook security lapse affects millions more Instagram
users than first stated.  Guardian, April 18, 2019,
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2019/apr/18/instagram
-facebook-password-lapse-privacy-breach-data-exposed- Last accessed,
April 18, 2019

 Price, Emily, France Fines Google 57 Million For GDPR Violation,
Jan. 21 2019,
http://fortune.com/2019/01/21/france-fines-google-57-million-for-gdpr-violations/

Privacy Shield, Key New Requirements for Participating Companies,
Informing individuals about data processing,
https://www.privacyshield.gov/Key-New-Requirements

Privacy Shield, https://www.privacyshield.gov/Program-Overview

WWW1 First International Conference on the World-Wide Web,
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FirstInternational
ConferenceontheWorld-WideWeb

Rushe, Dominic Google: don't expect privacy when sending to Gmail Teh
Guardian, Aug 15, 2013
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/aug/14/google-gmail-users-privacy-email-lawsuit
 
Ressa Maria, Facebook Let My Government Target Me. Here's Why I Still
Work With Them, The Time, Jan. 17, 2019,
http://time.com/5505458/facebook-maria-ressa-philippines/

Ryan, Marc, Warzel, Charlie, Kantrowitz. Alex, Growth At Any Cost: Top
Facebook Executive Defended Data Collection In 2016 Memo — And Warned
That Facebook Could Get People Killed, Buzzfeed, March 29, 2018,
https://www.buzzfeednews.com/article/ryanmac/growth-at-any-cost-top-facebook-executive-defended-data,
Last accessed April 12, 2019

Srnicek, Nick.  The only way to rein in big tech is to treat them as a
public service, The Guardian, Apr 23, 2019,
https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2019/apr/23/big-tech-google-facebook-unions-public-ownership


Stueck, Wendy, Former information commissioner Elizabeth Denham was
one of first to raise concerns over Facebook data, Globe and Mail,
March 25, 2018,
https://www.theglobeandmail.com/canada/british-columbia/article-former-information-commissioner-elizabeth-denham-was-one-of-first-to

Turow, Joseph, Let’s Retire the Phrase ‘Privacy Policy’, New York
Times, Aug. 20,
2018. https://www.nytimes.com/2018/08/20/opinion/20Turow.html

Turow, Joseph, Google Still Doesn’t Care About Your Privacy Fortune,
June 28, 2017
http://fortune.com/2017/06/28/gmail-google-account-ads-privacy-concerns-home-settings-policy/


Tiktok: India bans video sharing app,
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2019/apr/17/
tiktok-india-bans-video-sharing-app, Last accessed April 16, 2019

TikTok video-sharing app fined for collection of children's data , The
Guardian, Feb. 28, 2019
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2019/feb/28/
tiktok-video-sharing-app-fined-for-collection-of-childrens-data, Last
accessed April 16, 2019

Tufekci, Zeynep, Zuckerberg’s So-Called Shift Toward Privacy, NY
Times, Mar. 7, 2019, https://www.nytimes.com/2019/03/07/opinion/
zuckerberg-privacy-facebook.html

Disinformation and 'fake news': Final Report, Digital, Culture, Media
and Sport select committee, Feb, 2019,
https://publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201719/cmselect/
cmcumeds/1791/179102.htm

von Scheel, Elise, Facebook pressured Canada to ease up on data rules,
U.K. reports say, CBC News, Mar 03, 2019,
https://www.cbc.ca/news/politics/facebook-canada-data-pressure-1.5041063

Valentino-de Vries, Jennifer, Tacking Phones, Google Is a Dragnet for
the Police, NY Times, April 4, 2019,
https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2019/04/13/us/google-location-tracking-police.html

Vaidhyanathan, Siva Facebook’s new move isn't about privacy. It’s
about domination, Guardain, Mar. 7, 2019,
https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2019/mar/07/
facebook-privacy-domination

Warzel, Charlie, Thompson, Stuart A.  Tech Companies Say They Care, NT
Times April 10, 2019,
https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2019/04/10/opinion/tech-companies-privacy.html,
Last accessed April 17. 2019

Waterson, Jim, Obscure pro-Brexit group spends tens of thousands on
Facebook ads, Guardain, Jan. 14, 2019,
https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2019/jan/14/obscure-pro-brexit-group-
britains-future-spends-tens-of-thousands-on-facebook-ads

Waters, Richard, Murphy, Hannah, Stacey, Kiran, Social Media’s
Reckoning?, Financial Times, April, 13-14, 2019, p6

Wu, Tim, How Capitalism Betrayed Privacy, NY Times, April 10, 2019
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/10/opinion/sunday/privacy-capitalism.html


Weinberg, Zoe A. Y.  Google Settles Buzz Lawsuit The Harvard Crimson,
Sep. 7, 2010
https://www.thecrimson.com/article/2010/9/7/google-mason-privacy-settlement/

Yglesias Matthew The push to break up Big Tech, explained Vox, May 3,
2019 https://www.vox.com/recode/2019/5/3/18520703/big-tech-break-
up-explained

Zuboff, Shoshana, The Age of Surveillance Capitalism, Jan, 2019,
pp179, ISBN 97801-61039-564-4

